Refactor existing & add new details in Iceberg document (#20552)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/iceberg.rst

>     It is recommended to use Iceberg 0.9.0 or later.

Author: Yes, that's right. Users will not have any control over this from the Presto engine side. And current Iceberg version in Presto is `1.3.1`. As I checked Presto iceberg connector started from `0.9.0` this might have been highlighted from there for other engines.

Metastores
-----------
Iceberg tables stores most of the metadata in the metadata files along with the data on the
filesystem, but it still requires a central place to find the current location of the
current metadata pointer for a table. This central place is called the ``Iceberg Catalog``.
The Presto Iceberg connector supports different types of Iceberg Catalogs : ``Hive Metastore``,
``GLUE``, ``NESSIE``, ``HADOOP``

To configure the Iceberg connector, create a catalog properties file
``etc/catalog/iceberg.properties``. To define catalog type ``iceberg.catalog.type`` property is

> required along with the following contents, replacing the properties as appropriate:

Reviewer: with the properties' values replaced as follows:

    It is recommended to use Iceberg 0.9.0 or later.

Metastores
-----------
Iceberg tables stores most of the metadata in the metadata files along with the data on the filesystem.

> But to store small amount of metadata it still requires Metastore to find the current location of the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But to store small amount of metadata it still requires a central place to find the current location of the current
```

> But to store small amount of metadata it still requires Metastore to find the current location of the current

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove the "to store small amount of metadata".
```
Iceberg tables stores most of the metadata in the metadata files along 
with the data on the filesystem, but it still requires ...
```

> metadata pointer for a table. This central place is called ``Iceberg Catalog``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metadata pointer for a table. This central place is called the ``Iceberg Catalog``.
```

> The Iceberg connector supports different types of Iceberg Catalogs : ``Hive Metastore``,

Reviewer 2: "The Iceberg connector" -> "The Presto Iceberg connector"

``GLUE``, ``NESSIE``, ``HADOOP``

> To configure the Iceberg connector, create a catalog properties file

Reviewer 2: I think it is better to highlight the `iceberg.catalog.type` property here. Would you please add a sentence for it?

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In order to use a Nessie catalog, ensure to configure the catalog type with

Reviewer 3: Maybe this line could be rephrased as shorter without changing the meaning? Consider if "To use a Nessie catalog, configure the catalog type as" still means what you want it to mean here.

==================================================== ============================================================

Hadoop catalog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Iceberg connector supports Hadoop as Catalog

.. code-block:: none

    connector.name=iceberg
    hive.metastore.uri=hostname:port
    iceberg.catalog.type=hadoop

.. note::

    To use Hadoop catalog with Iceberg table, it requires the ``hive.metastore.uri`` property, even
    though it doesn't rely on metastore for metadata when using Hadoop Catalog. You can provide

>     a placeholder with ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``. This will be fixed in a

Reviewer 2: YOu can provide a placeholder with ...
-->
You can provide any value to this property, for example, ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``.

>     future release of Presto (:issue:`20579`).

Reviewer 2: @agrawalreetika Can you please double check if this issue display is correct? It shows up as this picture in my browser
<img width="619" alt="Screenshot 2023-08-16 at 6 15 22 PM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/33299678/0d667dd3-b6d1-4e25-9b55-af7d775fb33d">

Author: Verified, after compiling on web UI it's showing correct issue link - 
![image](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7887476/a0744632-c7ce-4065-8cba-37859899f48a)

==================================================== ============================================================

Hadoop catalog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Iceberg connector supports Hadoop as Catalog

.. code-block:: none

    connector.name=iceberg
    hive.metastore.uri=hostname:port
    iceberg.catalog.type=hadoop

.. note::

    To use Hadoop as Catalog with Iceberg table, catalog requires the ``hive.metastore.uri`` property

>     added even though it doesn't rely on metastore for metadata when using Hadoop Catalog. You

Reviewer 3: Suggest 

To use Hadoop as catalog with Iceberg table requires the ``hive.metastore.uri`` property, even though it doesn't rely on metastore for metadata when using Hadoop Catalog.

>     a placeholder with ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``. This will be fixed in a

Author: I have put up details about the issue in here https://github.com/prestodb/presto/issues/19920 
Currently since `hive.metastore.uri` property can not be null when using `Hadoop` as a catalog in Iceberg connector, we have to specify some placeholder for `hive.metastore.uri` property (doesn't necessarily have to be `thrift://localhost:9083`) which has to be fixed in this case since `Hadoop` catalog doesn't require any HMS for metadata.

Open for suggestions on how we want to add a note here about this, we can also add this issue link in the document until this is fixed?

>     a placeholder with ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``. This will be fixed in a

Reviewer 4: The Presto metadata store and Iceberg metadata store are two independent designs but they are coupled in the Presto-Iceberg connector, which, as a consequence, causes the dependency on the Hive metastore although the Iceberg Hadoop catalog doesn't use that. 
Adding an issue link here looks good to me. Or add it to the Section `Iceberg Connector Limitations`. Your call.

>     To use Hadoop as Catalog with Iceberg table, catalog requires ``hive.metastore.uri`` property
>     added even though it doesn't rely on metastore for metadata when using Hadoop Catalog. You
>     can provide a placeholder with ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``. This will not
>     be needed once check for ``hive.metastore.uri`` property is removed in case of Hadoop Catalog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To use Hadoop as Catalog with Iceberg table, catalog requires the ``hive.metastore.uri`` property
    added even though it doesn't rely on metastore for metadata when using Hadoop Catalog. You
    can provide a placeholder with ``hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083``. This will be fixed in a future release of Presto.
```

Is there an open issue for this BTW?

Author: Yes there are 2 issues reporting the same - https://github.com/prestodb/presto/issues/17342

                                                   Thrift protocol. If multiple URIs are provided, the first
                                                   URI is used by default and the rest of the URIs are
                                                   fallback metastores. This property is required.
                                                   Example: ``thrift://192.0.2.3:9083`` or
                                                   ``thrift://192.0.2.3:9083,thrift://192.0.2.4:9083``

``iceberg.file-format``                            The storage file format for Iceberg tables. The available     ``ORC``
                                                   values are ``PARQUET`` and ``ORC``.

``iceberg.compression-codec``                      The compression codec to use when writing files. The          ``GZIP``
                                                   available values are ``NONE``, ``SNAPPY``, ``GZIP``,
                                                   ``LZ4``, and ``ZSTD``.

``iceberg.catalog.type``                           The catalog type for Iceberg tables. The available values     ``hive``

>                                                    are ``hive``, ``hadoop``, and ``nessie`` corresponding to

Author: For glue, we need to set `iceberg.catalog.type=hive`. Details of each catalog property are also mentioned in the respective catalog section.

>                                                    are ``hive``, ``hadoop``, and ``nessie`` corresponding to

Reviewer 4: thanks for the clarification.

The Iceberg connector exposes extra hidden metadata tables. You can query these
as a part of SQL query by appending name with the table.

> ``$properties`` Table

Reviewer 2: This comment is for Line 196. Will you be able to add some explanation there to say those properties are available for all Presto tables, not just Iceberg tables?

Author: @yingsu00 Under `Table Properties` in the Iceberg document some properties that are mentioned are I think specific to the Iceberg table like `partitioning`, `location` & `format_version`.
For hive connector, these are `partitioned_by `, `external_location`  respectively & `format_version` is not there for Hive.
Please correct me if you were talking about something else here.

Reviewer 2: @agrawalreetika yes I mean it would help the users to mention if they are Iceberg specific, or the same with Hive, just as you explained above.

    ---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
       0     | s3://my-bucket/ctas_nation/data/9f889274-6f74-4d28-8164-275eef99f660.parquet | PARQUET     |           25 |               1648 | {1=52, 2=222, 3=105, 4=757} | {1=25, 2=25, 3=25, 4=25} | {1=0, 2=0, 3=0, 4=0} |  NULL            | {1=0, 2=ALGERIA, 3=0, 4= haggle. careful} | {1=24, 2=VIETNAM, 3=4, 4=y final packaget} | NULL         | NULL          | NULL

SQL Support
-----------

The Iceberg connector supports querying and manipulating Iceberg tables and schemas

> (databases). Here are the examples of SQL Operations supported from Presto :

Reviewer 2: Here are the examples of SQL Operations supported from Presto :
-->
Here are some examples of the SQL operations supported by Presto :

CREATE SCHEMA
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new Iceberg schema named ``web`` that will store tables in an
S3 bucket named ``my-bucket``::

    CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.web
    WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/')

CREATE TABLE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new Iceberg table named ``page_views`` in the ``web`` schema

> that is stored using the ORC file format, partitioned by date and

Reviewer 2: partitioned by date and country
--->
partitioned by ``ds`` and  ``country``

country::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views (
      view_time timestamp,
      user_id bigint,
      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',
      partitioning = ARRAY['ds', 'country']
    )

Create a Iceberg table with Iceberg format version 2::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views_v2 (
      view_time timestamp,
      user_id bigint,
      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',
      partitioning = ARRAY['ds', 'country'],
      format_version = '2'
    )

Partition Column Transform
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Beyond selecting a particular column for partitioning, you can select a ``transform`` and partition the table by the transformed

Reviewer 2: Beyond selecting a particular column
-->
Beyond selecting some particular columns

value of the column.

Available Transforms in Presto Iceberg connector include:

* ``Bucket`` (partitions data into a specified number of buckets using a hash function)
* ``Truncate`` (partitions the table based on the truncated value of the field, and can specify the width of truncated value)

> Create a Iceberg table partitioned into 8 buckets of equal sized ranges::

Reviewer 2: a Iceberg
-->
an Iceberg

Replace other 4 places too.

    CREATE TABLE players (
        id int,
        name varchar,
        team varchar
    )
    WITH (
        format = 'ORC',
        partitioning = ARRAY['bucket(team, 8)']
    );

Create a Iceberg table partitioned by first letter of the team field::

    CREATE TABLE players (
        id int,
        name varchar,
        team varchar
    )
    WITH (
        format = 'ORC',
        partitioning = ARRAY['truncate(team, 1)']
    );

.. note::

>     ``Day``, ``Month``, ``Year``, ``Hour`` based partition column transform is not supported in Presto

Reviewer 2: ``Day``, ``Month``, ``Year``, ``Hour`` based partition column transform is not supported in Presto Iceberg connector
-->
``Day``, ``Month``, ``Year``, ``Hour`` partition column transform functions are not supported in Presto Iceberg connector yet

       0     | s3://my-bucket/ctas_nation/data/9f889274-6f74-4d28-8164-275eef99f660.parquet | PARQUET     |           25 |               1648 | {1=52, 2=222, 3=105, 4=757} | {1=25, 2=25, 3=25, 4=25} | {1=0, 2=0, 3=0, 4=0} |  NULL            | {1=0, 2=ALGERIA, 3=0, 4= haggle. careful} | {1=24, 2=VIETNAM, 3=4, 4=y final packaget} | NULL         | NULL          | NULL

SQL Support
-----------

The Iceberg connector supports querying and manipulating Iceberg tables and schemas
(databases). Here are the examples of SQL Operations supported from Presto :

CREATE SCHEMA
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new Iceberg schema named ``web`` that will store tables in an
S3 bucket named ``my-bucket``::

    CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.web
    WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/')

CREATE TABLE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new Iceberg table named ``page_views`` in the ``web`` schema
that is stored using the ORC file format, partitioned by date and
country::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views (
      view_time timestamp,
      user_id bigint,
      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',

>       partitioning = ARRAY['ds', 'country']

Reviewer 2: Do we support partition column transformations? If yes, let's add a sub section here. If not, then add a line saying these are not supported yet.

Author: Presto Iceberg Connector currently already supports Bucket & Truncate transform with partition column in Iceberg Table. This feature request is to add transform support for Day, Month, Year, Hour
Created Issue for the same - https://github.com/prestodb/presto/issues/20570

    )

Create a Iceberg table with Iceberg format version 2::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views_v2 (
      view_time timestamp,
      user_id bigint,
      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',
      partitioning = ARRAY['ds', 'country'],
      format_version = '2'
    )

INSERT INTO
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Insert data into ``page_views`` table::

    INSERT INTO iceberg.web.page_views VALUES(TIMESTAMP '2023-08-12 03:04:05.321', 1, 'https://example.com', current_date, 'country');

CREATE TABLE AS SELECT
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new table ``page_views_new`` from an existing table ``page_views``::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views_new AS SELECT * FROM iceberg.web.page_views

SELECT
^^^^^^

SELECT table operations are supported for Iceberg format version 1 & version 2 in the connector::

    SELECT * FROM iceberg.web.page_views;

    SELECT * FROM iceberg.web.page_views_v2;

.. note::

>     Iceberg Tables with format version 2 where delete files are present not filtered in ``SELECT``

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what is meant here. Maybe 
"where delete files are present are not filtered", 
if that is your meaning?

Author: Yes, modified

>     Iceberg Tables with format version 2 where delete files are present are not filtered in ``SELECT``

Reviewer 2: Does it mean it gives wrong results? "are not filtered in" is kind of vague here. Can you use more precise words?

Reviewer 2: Iceberg Tables with format version 2 where delete files are present are not filtered in SELECT operations in Presto, and which will produce wrong results without filtering.
-->
The SELECT operations on Iceberg Tables with format version 2 do not read the delete files and remove the deleted rows as of now.

Please update the last section too.

Iceberg connector.

Example Queries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's create an Iceberg table named `ctas_nation`, created from the TPCH `nation`
table. The table has four columns: `nationkey`, `name`, `regionkey`, and `comment`.

.. code-block:: sql

    USE iceberg.tpch;
    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS ctas_nation AS (SELECT * FROM nation);
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
    (4 rows)

We can simply add a new column to the Iceberg table by using the `ALTER TABLE`
statement. The following query adds a new column named `zipcode` to the table.

.. code-block:: sql

    ALTER TABLE ctas_nation ADD COLUMN zipcode VARCHAR;
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
     zipcode   | varchar |       |
    (5 rows)

> We can also rename the new column to `location`:

Reviewer 2: to `location`. -> to another name, e.g. `location`

I feel just "location" would likely to be confused with the table property "location"

.. code-block:: sql

    ALTER TABLE ctas_nation RENAME COLUMN zipcode TO location;
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
     location  | varchar |       |
    (5 rows)

Finally, we can delete the new column. The table columns will be restored to the
original state.

.. code-block:: sql

    ALTER TABLE ctas_nation DROP COLUMN location;
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
    (4 rows)

Time Travel
-----------

Iceberg and Presto Iceberg connector supports time travel via table snapshots

> identified by unique snapshot IDs. The snapshot IDs are stored in the `$snapshots`

Reviewer 2: `$snapshots` was not highlighted. Should it be double quoted?

       0     | s3://my-bucket/ctas_nation/data/9f889274-6f74-4d28-8164-275eef99f660.parquet | PARQUET     |           25 |               1648 | {1=52, 2=222, 3=105, 4=757} | {1=25, 2=25, 3=25, 4=25} | {1=0, 2=0, 3=0, 4=0} |  NULL            | {1=0, 2=ALGERIA, 3=0, 4= haggle. careful} | {1=24, 2=VIETNAM, 3=4, 4=y final packaget} | NULL         | NULL          | NULL

Time Travel

> -----------

Reviewer 2: This comment is for ln 323
At this moment, the Schema Evolution has not been talked about.

Reviewer 2: And for line 355, you mentioned we just created the ctas table, but this was not mentioned anywhere above. It might be good to have basic DDL and DML sections before the SELECT queries.

Author: > This comment is for ln 323 At this moment, the Schema Evolution has not been talked about.

Ok, I will shift Schema Evolution before Time Travel Section in the document

Author: > And for line 355, you mentioned we just created the ctas table, but this was not mentioned anywhere above. It might be good to have basic DDL and DML sections before the SELECT queries.

@yingsu00 In the `Example Queries` section of the same there first query is CTAS, and all the further queries are done on the same table. Please let me know if anything is missing here.

> -----------

Reviewer 2: Shall we add a section for SELECT support before Time travel? We can explain what type of Iceberg queries are supported by Presto there, e.g. read optimized, delta, real-time. We can also explain the support of COW and MOR tables there, or before talking about table properties

Author: @yingsu00 I have added the `SELECT` section in the `SQL Support` section. Since currently  Iceberg format version 1 & version 2 both read support is there but with limitations on version 2 tables where Delete files are present. I have mentioned that limitation as well. Please let me know if we should add any further details there.

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
     zipcode   | varchar |       |
    (5 rows)

We can also rename the new column to `location`:

.. code-block:: sql

    ALTER TABLE ctas_nation RENAME COLUMN zipcode TO location;
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
     location  | varchar |       |
    (5 rows)

Finally, we can delete the new column. The table columns will be restored to the
original state.

.. code-block:: sql

    ALTER TABLE ctas_nation DROP COLUMN location;
    DESCRIBE ctas_nation;

.. code-block:: text

      Column   |  Type   | Extra | Comment
    -----------+---------+-------+---------
     nationkey | bigint  |       |
     name      | varchar |       |
     regionkey | bigint  |       |
     comment   | varchar |       |
    (4 rows)

> Examples

Reviewer 2: This title is not appropriate. Other top level titles were all Iceberg operations or properties, and they all contain examples. I think we can rename it to SQL Support.

Also these DDL and DML better to be moved before Time Travel.

--------

The Iceberg connector supports querying and manipulating Iceberg tables and schemas
(databases). Here are the examples of SQL Operations supported from Presto :

> Create a schema

Reviewer 2: CREATE SCHEMA

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new Iceberg schema named ``web`` that will store tables in an
S3 bucket named ``my-bucket``::

    CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.web
    WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/')

> Create table

Reviewer 2: Upper case, ditto

      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',
      partitioned_by = ARRAY['ds', 'country']
    )

Create a Iceberg table with Iceberg format version 2::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views (
      view_time timestamp,
      user_id bigint,
      page_url varchar,
      ds date,
      country varchar
    )
    WITH (
      format = 'ORC',
      partitioned_by = ARRAY['ds', 'country'],
      format_version = '2'
    )

Create table as Select
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a new table ``page_views_new`` from an existing table ``page_views``::

    CREATE TABLE iceberg.web.page_views_new AS SELECT * FROM iceberg.web.page_views

Alter table
^^^^^^^^^^^

Alter table operations are supported in the connector::

     ALTER TABLE iceberg.web.page_views ADD COLUMN zipcode VARCHAR;

     ALTER TABLE iceberg.web.page_views RENAME COLUMN zipcode TO location;

     ALTER TABLE iceberg.web.page_views DROP COLUMN location;

Drop table
^^^^^^^^^^^

Drop the table ``page_views``. This only drops the metadata
& data for the table::

    DROP TABLE iceberg.web.page_views

Drop schema
^^^^^^^^^^^

Drop a schema::

    DROP SCHEMA iceberg.web

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't see the section for INSERT, DELETE, Merge or upsert? Let's have a section for it and state clearly what is supported and what is not.

Author: - I missed the INSERT example, will add that
- For DELETE I have mentioned in `Iceberg Connector Limitations` section that it's only supported if the ``WHERE`` clause matches entire partitions.
- MERGE & UPDATE sql syntax is not yet supported in Presto. I will open an issue for the same

     nationkey | name | regionkey | comment
    -----------+------+-----------+---------
    (0 rows)

Iceberg Connector Limitations
-----------------------------

* :doc:`/sql/delete` is only supported if the ``WHERE`` clause matches entire partitions.

> * Iceberg Tables using v2 of the Iceberg specification where delete files are present are

Reviewer 2: Explain better here too
